Skip to content Cardellina Chiapas Birding Tours Trips Day Tours Full mornings out, highlands to coast
Multi-day Tours Three days to a full expedition
Build Your Own Your dates, your target birds
Chiapas Birds Bird Library Every endemic and speciality in the state
Trip Reports What we found, with the eBird checklists
Guides Valente & Ben The two of us, and our wider team
Partners Projects and people we work with
Plan a trip
Resplendent Quetzal
Pharomachrus mocinno · Chiapas highlands, Mexico
Scientific name Pharomachrus mocinno
Conservation status Near Threatened (IUCN) Endangered in Mexico
Range Chiapas, Mexico and the highlands of Guatemala (nominate subspecies); Costa Rica, Honduras, Nicaragua and Panama (Costa Rican subspecies)
Elevation 1,000 m – 3,000 m
Best months December – March
Difficulty Moderate — reliable with a local guide
The Resplendent Quetzal is perhaps the most legendary bird species on the planet, famed for its unique beauty and its central place in Mayan and Aztec folklore. The iridescent green plumage, striking royal red underparts, and streaming tail feathers that undulate gracefully in flight are among the most impressive sights in all of nature. Seeing a Resplendent Quetzal arriving to a site from overhead for the first time borders on the religious as birding experiences go. A trip to Chiapas is simply incomplete without seeing this bird.
Guide notes — Ben
It has to be seen to understand its majesty. The grace of the Quetzal's flight just cannot be captured digitally. My favourite bird by some distance.
Identification
The male's 70 cm-long tail feathers, surprisingly bulky proportions, and iridescent crown are all unmistakable.
Guide notes — Valente
The female may look somewhat similar to other trogons, but the greenish head and grey belly are unique in its range.
Distribution and habitat
The Resplendent Quetzal prefers more or less virgin cloud forest with tall trees, between 1,000 m and 3,000 m elevation. It migrates altitudinally, following its preferred fruit, the "aguacatillo" and various other members of the laurel family (Lauraceae). Little is known of the nominate subspecies's movements within Mexico. There may be altitudinal migration, though it is also thought that certain individuals remain in some areas year-round.
Guide notes — Valente
Our favourite places for finding the Quetzal are the Lagunas de Montebello, Tacaná Volcano, and Tapalapa. They are famously found at El Triunfo Biosphere Reserve, but we find the journey there very difficult on the roads and quite time-consuming, relatively speaking.
Seasonality and finding the species
The best bet for finding a Quetzal is through contact with local guides who monitor nesting sites, and by visiting areas where its favourite fruits are in season. Its whining song is a good indication that you are close, while its odd chuckling call tends to mean the bird is fleeing the area and you are unlikely to see it again for a while.
The Resplendent Quetzal is a target on our Montebello Lakes day tour and a highlight of multi-day bespoke itineraries through the Chiapas highlands.
See our Chiapas birding tours
info@cardellina.com +52 961 516 4020 San Cristóbal de las Casas, Chiapas
Plan a trip Privacy policy
© 2026 Cardellina Birdwatching Tours
